Adding a compute resource selection optimization guide (#1151)
rcgsheffield/sheffield_hpc: hpc/Choosing-appropriate-resources.rst

*****************************************
Choosing appropriate compute resources
*****************************************

==============
Introduction
==============

Choosing appropriate resources for your jobs is essential to ensuring your jobs will be scheduled as quickly as possible while wasting as little resources as possible.

The key resources you need to optimise for are:

* `Time allocation <#time-allocation-limits>`_
* `CPU cores allocation <#cpu-allocation-limits>`_
* `RAM / Memory allocation <#memory-allocation-limits>`_
* `File storage limits / file store performance characteristics <#filestore-limits-file-store-performance-characteristics>`_

> It is important to be aware that the resource requests that you make are not flexible, if your job exceeds what you have requested for it the scheduler will terminate your job abruptly and without any warning. This means that it is safer to over estimate than under estimate your job's requirements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is important to be aware that the resource requests that you make are not flexible: if your job exceeds what you have requested for it the scheduler will terminate your job abruptly and without any warning. This means that it is safest to over estimate your job's requirements if they cannot be accurately and precisely known in advance.
```

This does not mean that you can set extremely large values for these resource requests for several reasons, the most important being:

* Large allocations will take longer to queue and start.

> * Allocations larger than the scheduler can satisfy with the available resources **will never start.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Allocations larger than the scheduler can ever satisfy with the available resources **will never start.**
```

> It is also important to note that the Sheffield HPC clusters have been designed to fulfil different purposes. ShARC is a capability cluster designed to run very large compute jobs that will use multiple nodes. Bessemer is a capacity cluster designed to run compute jobs which will sit within a single node.

Reviewer: Add 'choice of cluster' to list of 4 bullet points at the top of the page? Hmm...

Author: I think you are probably right, that is going to be a great way to telegraph there is a difference please look into it.

Would you propose adding another bullet then another very small section called '**Cluster Selection**' and 

```
It is also important to note that the Sheffield HPC clusters have been designed to fulfil different purposes. ShARC is a capability cluster designed to run very large compute jobs that will use multiple nodes. Bessemer is a capacity cluster designed to run compute jobs which will sit within a single node.

With this in mind, you should prioritize putting smaller core count jobs onto Bessemer and massively parallel jobs onto ShARC while utilizing a form of MPI. 
```

> It is also important to note that the Sheffield HPC clusters have been designed to fulfil different purposes. ShARC is a capability cluster designed to run very large compute jobs that will use multiple nodes. Bessemer is a capacity cluster designed to run compute jobs which will sit within a single node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is also important to note that the Sheffield HPC clusters have been designed to fulfil different purposes. ShARC is for the most part a *capability* cluster designed to run larger compute jobs that will use multiple nodes. Bessemer is a *capacity* cluster designed to run smaller compute jobs which will fit on a single node.
```

> With this in mind, you should prioritize putting smaller core count jobs onto Bessemer and massively parallel jobs onto ShARC while utilizing a form of MPI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With this in mind, you should prioritize putting smaller core count jobs onto Bessemer and massively parallel jobs onto ShARC (while utilizing a form of :ref:`MPI <parallel_MPI>`).
```

-----------------

.. include:: ../referenceinfo/TimeAllocationLimits.rst

> The time allocation limits will differ between job types and by cluster - a summary of these differences can be seen above. Time requirements are highly dependent on how many CPU cores your job is using - using more cores will drastically decrease the amount of time for processing - further details on CPU cores selection can be found in the `CPU cores allocation <#cpu-allocation-limits>`_ section.

Reviewer: "will drastically" -> "may significantly decrease the amount of time the job spends running, depending on how optimally the software you are using supports parallelisation."

Author: Sorted in 83a6f4aa784ad10c18a8003a153fca6da634694b

> Determining time requirements using timing commands in your script:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Determining time requirements using timing commands in your script
```

--------------------------------------------------------------------

> A way of deducing the wall_clock_time used by a job is to use the date or the timeused command within the script file. The date command is part of the Linux operating system whereas the timeused command is specific to iceberg and provides the usage figures directly rather than having to manually calculate it from two subsequent date commands. Here are some examples -

Reviewer: s/wall_clock_time/'wall clock' time/

Reviewer: Iceberg is dead

Reviewer: Would suggest using scheduler reporting info for benchmark info in first instance if not using interactive session.

Author: Resolving iceberg bit with 97a0f215ed7ed3f3fb47cacae80ec14568b87943 and wallclocl with 97a0f215ed7ed3f3fb47cacae80ec14568b87943

I didn't want to mention using the scheduler as it is non-specific i.e. will include IO wait / filesystem and everything in the job but we can certainly amend to include it with said caveats.

Author: Could you add the command to the clusters? https://github.com/rcgsheffield/sheffield_hpc/issues/1193

Not actually sure where the original timeused code resides at present.

Using the **date** command: ::

        #$ -l h_rt=10:00:00
        date
        my_program < my_input
        date

When the above script is submitted (via qsub), the job output file will contain the date and time at each invocation of the date command. You can then calculate the difference between these date/times to determine the actual time taken.

> Using the **timeused** command: ::

Reviewer: Would omit this until we have this functionality on both clusters.

Author: Yeah I was going to pause the merge until https://github.com/rcgsheffield/sheffield_hpc/issues/1193 is resolved :)

       #$ -l h_rt=10:00:00
       export TIMECOUNTER=0
       source timeused
       my_program < my_input
       source timeused

When the above script is submitted the first invocation of the timeused command will initialise the timer counter due to the fact that TIMECOUNTER variable is set to 0. The subsequent invocations will report the time in hours,minutes and seconds since the first invocation.

-----------------

.. include:: ../referenceinfo/CpuAllocationLimits.rst

> The CPU allocation limits will differ between job types and by cluster - a summary of these differences can be seen above. It is important to note that SLURM and SGE will request CPU on a different basis as detailed above.

Reviewer: "It is important to note that SLURM and SGE will request CPU on a different basis as detailed above." -> what's meant by this?

Author: `-pe <env> <nn>` versus `-c <nn>` I believe.

We could add a relative link to the table?

Determining CPU requirements:
----------------------------------

In order to determine your CPU requirements, you should investigate if your program / job supports parallel execution. If the program only supports serial processing, then you can only use 1 CPU core and should be using Bessemer (faster CPUs) to do so.

If your job / program supports multiple cores, you need to assess whether it supports SMP (symmetric multiprocessing) where you can only use CPUs on 1 node or MPI (message passing interface) where you can access as many nodes, CPUs and cores as are available.

> For SMP only type parallel processing jobs: you can use a maximum of 16 cores on ShARC and 40 cores on Bessemer. Ideally you should use Bessemer as you can not only access more cores, you are using more modern cores.

Reviewer: With public nodes

> For MPI type parallel processing jobs: these can only run on ShARC and although you can access as many cores as are available you must consider how long a job will take to queue waiting for resources compared the the decrease in time for the job to complete computation.

Reviewer: Could note that multi-node jobs typically require MPI for inter-proc communication but MPI can also be used / may be required for comms between a set of processes all packed onto a single node.

Author: Hopefully addressed in 9d817a28b5caec9ce8f4c8b1101ff96bef45f556

> For both parallel processing methods you should run several test jobs using the tips from the `Time allocation <#time-allocation-limits>`_ section with various numbers of cores to assess what factor of speedup/slowdown is attained for queuing and computation / the total time for job completion.

Reviewer: Could add things about 
 - extrapolating from smaller test jobs
 - amdahl's law (if not by name) i.e. imperfect scaling
 - jobs may be CPU, memory bandwidth or IO bound - detailed benchmarking/profiling for exploring limiting factors is beyond the scope of this guide.

Author: Yes I think I will amend this with a bit more detail now.

Author: Added a bit more on this - complete with CSS hacky solutions.

Remember, the larger your request, the longer it will take for the resources to become available and the time taken to queue is highly dependent on other cluster jobs.

-----------------

.. include:: ../referenceinfo/MemoryAllocationLimits.rst

The memory allocation limits will differ between job types and by cluster - a summary of these differences can be seen above. It is important to note that SLURM and SGE will request memory on a different basis as detailed above.

Determining memory requirements:
----------------------------------

**By using the emailing parameters of the qsub or sbatch command:**

Submit your job ``qsub`` or ``sbatch`` by specifying very generous memory and time requirements to ensure that it runs to completion" and also using the ``-M`` and ``-m abe`` or  ``--mail-user=`` and ``--mail-type=ALL``   parameters to receive an email-report. The mail message will list the maximum memory usage ( maxvmem / MaxVMSize  ) as well as the wallclock time used by the job.

Here is an example job script for SGE: ::

>       #$ -l h_rt=120:00:00

Reviewer: Suggest making wall time the same for both examples

Author: This will be amended in my next commit.

      #$ -l rmem=8G
      #$ -m abe
      #$ -M joe.blogs@sheffield.ac.uk

>       myprog < mydata.txt > myresults.txt\

Reviewer: omit `\`

Author: This will be amended in my next commit.

Here is an example job script for SLURM: ::

      #SBATCH --mem=8G
      #SBATCH --time=01:00:00
      #SBATCH --mail-user=joe.blogs@sheffield.ac.uk
      #SBATCH --mail-type=ALL

>       myprog < mydata.txt > myresults.txt\

Reviewer: omit `\`

Author: This will be amended in my next commit.

When the job completes, you will receive an email reporting the memory and time usage figures.

-----------------

**By using the qstat or sstat / sacct command:**

You can detect the memory used by your job while it is running by using the **qstat** command for SGE as follows:

While a job is still running find out its job id by: ::

    qstat

And check its current usage of memory by: ::

    qstat -F -j job_id | grep mem

If your job has already finished you can list the memory usage with **qacct**: ::

    qacct -j job_id

The reported figures will indicate:

* the currently used memory ( vmem ).
* maximum memory needed since startup ( maxvmem ).

> * cumulative memory_usage*seconds ( mem ).

Reviewer: 'cumulative memory_usage*seconds' -> omit?

Author: This will be amended in my next commit.

It is the **maxvmem** figure that you will need to use to determine the ``-l rmem=`` parameter for your next job.

-----------------

You can detect the memory used by your job while it is running by using the **sacct** command for SLURM as follows:

While a job is still running find out its job id by: ::

    sacct

And check its current usage of memory by: ::

    sstat job_id --format='JobID,MaxVMSize'

If your job has already finished you can list the memory usage with sacct: ::

    sacct --format='JobID,Elapsed,MaxVMSize'

It is the **MaxVMSize** figure that you will need to use to determine the ``--mem=`` parameter for your next job.

.. include:: ../referenceinfo/FileStoreLimits.rst

-----------------

Determining how much storage space your jobs will need:
--------------------------------------------------------------------

> One method to determine how much space your jobs are likely to consume is to run an example job within a specific directory saving the output within.

Reviewer: Assuming no churn in `$PWD` during the job?

Once the run has completed you can determine the amount of storage taken by the job by running: ::

    du -sh my_directory_name

-----------------

=========================================================
Special limits and alternative queues
=========================================================

If you have paid for a reservation, your research group or department has purchased additional resources there may be other accounts and partitions you can specify which will override normal limits imposed on the cluster jobs.

> * :ref:`Specific group nodes on ShARC<groupnodes_sharc>`

Reviewer: Could note that these are non-exhaustive lists (few private nodes ahve public docs)
